## PyCaret has optimized my time for predictive model analysis
When I face the challenge of building prediction models in my different projects or in the data science challenges (Kaggle, Datathon, etc.), I always face a laborious and scrupulous trial and error to discover the best model and optimize its performance.  

Often experience or intuition, lead you to choose an algorithm or set of models that could better adapt to the kind of data you work with, but you have no choice but to compare it with other algorithms to verify that your hypothesis is correct before moving on to the optimization phase of the chosen model. Of Course, the complete previous phase of choosing the best variables, reducing dimensionality or delete multi-collinearity, etc., entails a programming time from which you cannot escape if you want to be rigorous to detect the best possible algorithm for that dataset. This is further complicated when the deadlines are very tight either by collaborating with other workgroups on which your work depends or simply because you are participating in a Datathon in which you have a limited time to give the first results.  

Recently I´ve been exploring the concept of **AutoML** (Automatic selection of Machine Learning-ML- algorithms, features and hyperparameters), I recognize that with a little suspicion, because many sell it as the end of data scientists, but after testing various options and libraries, for me it has been an **essential tool** to optimize my ML workflow time and minimize the deadlines of putting into production, with much less heavy work and manual adjustments, drastically reducing the time required to reach the optimization stage of the model.  

On this way I stumbled upon the PyCaret library that has become part of my kits of APIs indispensable to approach the problem and that implements an optimization of variables and a comparison between models with very little code, having in a few minutes an approximate idea of which models and hyperparameters will behave best in the face of that data, so that your time can be spent experimenting by focusing between two or three models.  

As there is more than enough documentation to work with the PyCaret library, I will set out here a case of practical use that I have made so that you can see its usefulness.
I recently enrolled in a Datathon organized by the Immune Technology Institute on a challenge for **early detection of cardiac arrhythmias using Automatic External Defibrillators (DEA)** that had to be solved between different teams and throughout that afternoon. Finally, I couldn't attend, but I tried to reproduce the challenge asynchronously and **compare the result** with the winners. The challenge between the teams was to obtain a balanced error rate (BER) as low as possible, taking into account the fewest variables, for this purpose two sets of data were provided, one with which to work and the other with which to compare the developed model and finally calculate the BER. The fundamental problem with this dataset is that they are **unbalanced** so the standard classification algorithms are sessed to the majority class, which **compromises their performance**. In this case the undersampling or oversampling strategy to balance the data was not necessary as the models between the teams were evaluated by the BER metric that is defined as a balance between Sensitivity (Se) and Specialty (Sp) and therefore takes into account that imbalance, which are key metrics in medical diagnostic environments.  

That said, the strategy was to have a quick approximation of the algorithms that perform best in the **F1 metric** and how much **dimensionality could be reduced** for good performance. At this point, PyCaret provides a very effective tool, providing the most predictive variables and comparing metrics among the most popular binary classification algorithms, giving you a ranking to focus on with **very few lines of code**.  
We have a Dataset with 30 variables and a binary target variable VF (0: Healthy, 1: Ventricular Fibrillation).  

### Conclusions:  
- Automated machine learning (AutoML) can be a valuable tool even for experienced Data Scientist by offering well-designed pipelines that handle data preprocessing, feature selection, and quick model creation and evaluation and few lines of code.  
- AutoML I see it as an efficient approach to the problem and, contrary to what might seem, it is necessary to have some knowledge to correctly interpret the results offered.  
- The PyCaret library can be one of those useful AutoML with an easy learning curve and with good support and tutorials to learn it.


